Um, we are really interested in, uh,
diving into some questions with you.
Um, but if you could give us a sense of, um, what it is
that, um, your role is
and also the complaint that you've brought.
Um, and then I'm sure we can dive right in.
Brilliant. Don't need to hold this down to talk. Oh, no,
No. Just use a big voice.
Kiara. Um, thank, thank you for the welcome.
And actually thank you for the opportunity to speak,
um, to the committee today.
This is actually a really important issue, uh,
that we're actually here today to deliver,
um, a conversation with you.
Um, I am Daniel, Deb Bono.
I'm proudly the chief executive of Danita Airport,
supported today by Craig Shri from
who's our legal counsel on this issue.
So once again, thank you for the opportunity.
Um, we'll take, um, our submission
and accompanying materials as read.
Um, but before we get into our conversations,
a few key points I'd like to step through
before we get to that point.
Um, firstly for us, we've made this complaint
because we believe the levies are simply unjust
and unfairly targeted airports who have worked really hard
to develop new international routes,
we feel we've been penalized, um, for starting new services
while established airports pay nothing
for border services on new routes.
That's a key distinction here.
Um, to need an airports served scheduled international
services for 25 years up until COVID-19,
COVID-19 saw, uh,
significant consequential effects on the aviation sector,
particularly the supply side shocks around fleet
and crew availability, which has led
to us taking a bit longer than some others to reestablish
our footing on the international scene.
The, the airport sector was very united on its view that,
um, international airport should be supported
and border processing costs should be paid
from existing levies.
Those being the BPLs we're disappointed.
The border agencies, um, didn't shift their view, um, from
that because the airport cost recovery act existed and that
because it existed, regulations had to be made.
The best solution here, in our view,
should be repealing the act,
although I appreciate that's not
necessary from the committee's.
Uh, powers, um,
Love an ambitious, Ambitious, ambitious that,
that's stuck with that thing.
Um, let me start also
with talking about the benefits of international services.
And we can't, I can't overstate this.
Um, what we have done in Dunedin, uh,
and what international services mean
to communities is consistent with the tourism,
the government's, uh, tourism growth roadmap.
We're really grateful to have the support of Minister Upton
and Minister Meger on the restart
of our inaugural services last June back to the Gold Coast.
Um, great to have their support, um, the economic impact of
what we've achieved in Indeed
and delivers 58,000 more seats
to New Zealand from Australia, which again, is consistent
with that go for growth, um, agenda of the government.
And actually Ford bookings are really good
and we've had really strong demand on those services.
They deliver direct visitor spend into our community
and nothing, I tell you what,
nothing will grow in economy faster
than international service.
They deliver, uh, GST spend, uh, and revenue to the crown.
And of course, they also deliver, uh, visitor spend
to the regional and national economy, uh,
and provide amenity
and choice for parts
of New Zealand in terms of international travel.
The other advantage of direct international travel,
of course, is that it reduces indirect, um,
international travel, which, uh,
in itself reduces greenhouse gas emissions associated
from international aviation.
It's you burn less fuel
flying directly to the point you want to go.
If I go in directly,
Can I stop you there for questions?
Sure. Um, I've got two questions here.
Perhaps while you think about it, I'll ask mine.
So, um, committee's particularly interested in how those,
um, BPL fees compare to the fee
that you have been asked to pay.
Could you, um, compare for us the quantum, um, for you
and then what, um,
how the other airports have been effectively charged
for this, but it's,
it's spread in the other fees that they'll pay.
Um, and why this fee that
that's being against you is different from that.
Um, and whether this applies
to anyone else, say perhaps Hamilton.
Okay, let me, um, let me try and unpack that
and answer this as eloquently as I can.
Um, so as it sits now,
we have the regime called the border processing levies.
So the BPL is a standard national charge
that is imposed on every single international air ticket.
So every single national international passenger pays via
the airline, the levy to fund, uh, the costs
for providing order services.
Um, that regime still remains in Dunedin,
so international visitors flying
to Dunedin will still pay the VPL on their ticket.
Additional, um,
through this airport cost recovery Act is cost
that are directly imposed on Dunedin Airport,
not the customer for, um, reestablishment costs, um, to re
to reestablish border
processing services, if that makes sense.
Um, the other international imports, as they sit, um,
they don't pay, uh, any cost directly
for provision of border services.
Those services and renewal
of CapEx infrastructure at those airports is funded
by the border processing levy.
And, um, give us an idea of the amount, so what's levied,
um, through BPL at the other bigger airports, if you know,
and then what would be levied at Dunedin
Airport through that BPL.
And then what additional charge are you
being asked to front for here?
So for Dunedin, um, I don't,
I I can take that one on notice.
The exact BPL fee is, it sits today, I don't have in front
of me, but it's a standard charge that applies
to everyone regardless of airport. Um,
Which I imagine is very small
for you compared to say Auckland. That's why I'm asking.
It's the same. So when you No,
But per Tickets. Per,
yeah, per ticket, yeah. Yeah, per ticket's the same.
Whether you fly into Auckland
or fly into Dunedin, Queenstown, Wellton,
you pay the same amount on your ticket.
Yeah, that's right. So it's a cross subsidized system
by design, which actually works pretty well.
Mm-hmm. Um, outside of that, the direct costs, um,
imposed on Dunedin by border agencies, um, is a lump sum
for actual costs incurred, um, by border agencies
and reestablishing, uh, their presence at Dunedin,
What is it Cost circa,
circa half a million dollars as a a year?
No, to one off one. One off. Yep.
Cool. And, um, I'll come
to Grant McCullen or Miles Anderson.
Miles. Miles, do you
Have a question?
Well, I sort of asked that of, um, NPI. Okay.
Um,
Um, the actual costs, um, that is something
that this committee delves into regularly.
Um, do you think that the fee that's being, um, proposed
to you reflects the actual cost of, um, what is, you know,
the service offering that you are getting for it?
I would say the actual cost, yes.
Whether they're reasonable is still to be determined.
So we are going through, uh, line by line, um,
the cost recovery invoicing
and what they're passing on to us.
There are a few questions we need to step through with
that at this point, but we haven't yet, um, come back.
But our principal view, uh, is that they,
they shouldn't exist
because the BPL system is a mechanism to recover, um,
cost fund services at the border.
I just, I wanna understand, so you,
the only reason you stopped taking 'cause of COVID right?
They shut down to that point? Yes. Right.
And did any other airports,
international airports in New Zealand shut down at
that point that you're
Aware of? Correct. Great question.
Um, so, uh, Wellington
and Queensland Airports also ceased international,
scheduled international Air Operations at the same time.
Mm-hmm. Um, for those two airports,
they were without a scheduled flight for over a year.
Mm-hmm. We took four more years to get our services back.
Um, but, um, these regulations weren't created under haste,
um, to seek recovery
of reestablishment costs for those airports.
But they have been for us
And, and, and the other recently also in chips.
Right. Um, Hamilton reestablished
as an international airport,
do you know how that's been treated?
I believe, um, I don't wanna speak on Hamilton
or Waikato airport's behalf,
but I believe, um, a similar arrangement to this.
Um, but I don't have particular details
around the Waikato example.
The one thing I will state here, though,
is a quite different situation.
Please explain. Yeah.
The white catto, um, is a restart for a pretty long absence.
That's right. That's right. Whereas Dunedin, we had, we,
we were forced to close with the border
and the COVID-19 impacts,
and that led to Virgin Australia also going to, um,
receivership or administration in Australia.
And then of course, the supply side shock that perpetuated
after in, in terms of re reestablishing services.
But the key point for me, um,
and for this committee is we had services
for 25 years continuously.
It wasn't a stop start, stop start.
There was no fiscal risk to the crown over that period.
The services were sustainable.
One final question. So why did it take you
so long to get restarted?
That's another great question.
Um, reflecting on my comments about supply side shock as,
as the system recovered from COVID-19,
there was a massive shortage of crew.
Mm-hmm. And then of course, around the world in terms
of engineering parts, equipment, all the rest of it that led
to shortages of, of aviation capacity
to actually redeliver connectivity.
So that, that in itself created challenges for us.
We are in a global marketplace, um, trying to work
with airlines and reestablishing connectivity.
They're limited with what they have available, uh,
redeploying capacity, um, in a kind of sequential manner.
Um, so it took us a bit longer to get there,
but we, we finally got there.
Thank you. Just another couple
of questions on the timing point that grants raised.
Um, these, uh, this sort of cost recovery
as a lump sum wasn't in operation
before, um, the pandemic period, was it?
Uh, no. So why do you think it was introduced now?
Why do you think this, um, do you have insight into why, um,
the fee is being levied in this way over
and above the BPL charges that paid for this before?
It's something I, we really struggle to wrap our head
around because the BPL mechanism works.
It is, it is the way to recover these costs,
um, if, if at all.
So, um, my, my only, my only thought was
to be frank, is that the potential
for other regionally ports to decide
to start international services presented some challenges
for agencies around costs
and appropriations, which has led to officials looking
for a mechanism to try and recover, um, additional costs.
And did you anticipate this sort of charge?
Like was there warning, what, what did you know
before it was, was there
constipation with you? What did that
Look like? So they did
commence consultation with us in the middle
of last year, right.
At the point about noon. Yeah.
And right at the point we're also signing a deal
with Qantas, the Qantas group, for our new Jetstar services.
So, um, even at that point, the quantum of costs expected
for reestablishment were not known to us.
We didn't know about the costs
and the particulars of those until the start 2025.
Right. So this was after the services were already signed.
Yes. Um,
So the, the,
the bill approximately half a million dollars is Holland.
What sort of impact will that have on Canadian
Airport? Um,
another great question.
So, um, I might,
I might talk a little bit about international aviation route
development for most airports.
And we are no different. It's a zero sum game.
So the first few years of establishing a new international
air route, um, there's,
there's nothing in it for an airport company.
Um, it's a risk share arrangement.
Um, so for us, it's, this isn't about the bottom line
and the short term, it is in the long term in terms of, um,
building that sustainable aviation connectivity.
Um, but, um, there's nothing left in the tank.
So when we go into these negotiations
with an airline like any other airport,
you are putting your best foot forward
and working through, uh, a business case for them
to put capacity to your airport versus another.
Yep. Um, and you, you carefully balance all those competing,
uh, kind of priorities in that process.
I'll come back to your council to see if, um,
there's any comments, but I just wanna ask
our council if there's anything we have missed in our
fact finding that we talked about.
No, That's good. We're good. Okay.
Um, Craig, do you wanna, oh, you have question?
One question. So one of, one of the letters that we have,
um, in front of us actually states that, um,
there was a letter that came through
and the cost was approximately 120,000 to 140,000.
Do you know why it went up to 500,000 from
that approximate cost?
I don't have that letter knowledge of that in front of me,
but happy to take that one on notice.
It was a letter from Dunedin Airport
through Christine Stevenson.
We're happy to receive some more, um, you know, an, uh,
fuller answers to our questions if you'd
like to provide them after the hearing.
Yeah, thank you. That'll be fine. Yeah. Great.
We are out of time. Um,
is there anything short in
closing you'd like to share with us?
Anything we've missed that you want us to focus on?
Um, uh, one last point would be about, um,
the airport Cost Recovery Act versus the mechanisms
that now exist within the customs
and the biosecurity acts for cost recovery.
I think, I think what we are, what we're dealing
with at the moment is the fact
that the airport cost recovery,
cost recovery Act still exists,
albeit we believe it's defunct.
Um, has, has
provided this opportunity for agencies to use that, um,
piece of legislation to seek cost recovery outside
of the BPLs, the BPLs, um, as we see it
can recover the costs
for reestablishing services and intentionally airports.
Yep. Yep. Would you recommend the committee, um,
seek evidence from any other parties
that have an interest in this?
Not that I can think of, but Greg, uh,
New Zealand airport.
Yeah. Does New Zealand airports agree with you?
Yes. I mean, I think further evidence sought from
New Zealand Airports Association would
be helpful for this committee.
Um, okay. And, and evaluating this issue. Great.
Yeah. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.
You are very welcome to stay. This is public session. Okay,
Thank you.
Um, next we have from customs in the Ministry
of Primary Industry, our friends joining us at the table.
Welcome. Please,
before you get started, just give us a sense
of who's here we'll be.
Oh, thank you. Um, thank you. I, Stuart Anderson.
I'm the Deputy Director general
of Biosecurity New Zealand at MPI.
Um, Mary Chor is our, uh, policy manager from NPI as well.
Uh, got Dan McDermott, who's our commissioner, uh, for looks
after biosecurity for the central South.
Uh, so Danita airport operations fall under her.
And we also have, um, others from the MPR team
and customs, uh, with us as well. Just
Pop your hands up which ones?
Oh, yeah. Great. Thank you. Um, over to you.
I'm sure you can, uh, get a sense of
where the questions are, but I want to hand over
for a few opening comments to give a perspective.
Yes. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah, I'll just try a quick, uh,
few introductory comments and of course questions.
Um, so, uh, in, in terms of our position on this is
that the airport cost recovery regulations, um,
do not breach the standing orders,
and they don't need to be drawn to the house's attention,
the regulations as structured to meet the intent
of the cost recovery Airports Cost Recovery Act.
The objectives are obviously to reduce the crown's exposure
to unpredictable liabilities when international airports
start or restart,
and ensure that airports actually factor these costs into
their operations and, and, and their business decisions.
Um, if Parliament had considered
that the airport sectors historical defunct, um,
it could have repealed that when, when enacting the, uh,
border processing levies in 2015.
Um, but that didn't happen.
And, um, the ground rules were actually set out as to
how the two act should operate.
Uh, there is no double recovery of costs occurring.
Uh, the Biosecurity Act, the Customs
and Excise Act explicitly prohibit cost double
double recovery of costs.
So neither us nor customs, uh,
are recovering costs twice under this regime.
Um, the regulations recover costs only under section seven,
and that is, that is focused on establishing capacity
for processing travelers.
The actual costs of traveler processing, once things are up
and running, then get recovered under the
border processing levels.
Um, the regulations do also impose a strict
discipline around cost recovery.
So establishment costs are clearly defined as to
what can and can't be recovered.
Uh, so things like physical alterations, search benches,
x-ray machines, and so on cabinet,
and making these decisions also directed us
to act in good faith, uh, work
with the airports on reasonable grounds,
uh, for the actual costs.
We do believe that we've done so.
Um, in the case of Dun Airport
and Hamilton, uh, the agencies have worked really hard to,
to bring the cost down as far as possible, uh,
and reduced them significantly from
where we started with this.
Um, the regulations are consistent
with those cost recovery principles of
that the costs should be charged to those, uh,
who benefit from or create the need for the services,
and that commercial enterprises shouldn't be subsidized, um,
and should factor in those costs.
Um, using the border processing lever to pay
for establishment or restart costs would remove those
incentives, uh, defeating the policy intent
behind the legislation.
And then just lastly, um, in terms of the apportionment
of costs, uh,
and that, that question of how we recover them,
both ourselves and customs, um,
have really robust wide established frameworks around
how we collect costs and how we, uh, manage that.
The accounting of those we're transparent in the charges
and what we and what we collect.
Um, processing levies, passenger levies,
border levies are ring-fenced in our account system.
Um, they're reported annually
and that watershed on, uh, so we are, we are confident
around, around these measures
and that the regulations aligned
with the intent and the acts.
Thank you. That's very helpful.
I've got a question here and I'll take one.
Yep. Um, one simple question.
What, what did you charge Queenstown
and Wellington when they restarted?
So, so, so, Queenstown, Wellington, Auckland,
Christchurch, uh,
weren't charged reestablishment or restart costs.
Um, they, they started operations, uh, as soon
as the borders reopened following COVID, uh,
there was also nothing required to, to reestablish those.
So essentially, uh, flights ended, uh, certainly in, um, in,
uh, when Auckland had flights through COVID.
Yeah. But, uh, equipment wasn't, uh,
the airports were not shut down in terms of, um, uh,
equipment removed, uh, gear fit out, uh, which,
which was required for Dunedin
and Hamilton to actually set things up
to start processing passengers.
So why then? Okay.
That's an interesting point you made there.
So obviously, okay.
Because of the shorter close shutdown period
In the period of the period of time
following Borders reopening.
Uh,
So what happened? Did you
remove things from Dunedin,
the capital equipment that was down there?
Did you remove that and then have to reestablish it?
Yep. You, I can, I can talk to that.
Um, there was some equipment start left in Dunedin,
however, equipment has changed over time as well,
upgraded it, et cetera.
Some of the equipment was no longer usable,
so we refurbished where we could.
I think the original cost that we estimated
for Dunedin was 276,000.
We brought that down to about 115.
Um, and all the stuff that was reusable,
we did reuse it where we could.
That's helpful. Um, my question was going to be about, um,
trying to understand this, um, that,
that real cost recovery, um, let me also, uh,
get a better sense of the timing decisions here.
So, um, the, the reason for bringing in, um,
these, these provisions now, um, seems to be where any
or any unusualness might arise.
Um, so walk us through the thinking around, um,
why the sort of more generalized BPL shouldn't exist, um,
to recover those costs over time and why.
Um, it's this point in time
where there should be a lump sum payment,
because obviously you could set BPL,
so it would be you've had this emission across subsidized
system, um, or you could, and,
and that would recover over time from all of the airports
with international travel travel,
or you could use this system where you have, um,
essentially lumpy expenditure for an airport,
but not lumpy expenditure for the government.
Um, so let Mary expand on this,
but I think look, uh, broadly.
Um, so, um, the, the border processing levies, uh,
actually, uh, cannot be used for establishment costs
or restarting for airports.
Uh, and the provisions, why
Were they used then for Queenstown? They're
Used for processing passengers, so,
so once the airport is up
and running, uh, the passengers pay their levy on,
on their airfare that pays for the processing costs
of passengers coming through airports.
I'll just stop you there. I, I wonder if you've made a
mistake, why were they then used for hap
for Queenstown in those airports that restarted
after COVID without any charges?
Um, so there was no, there was no,
there was no establishment cost involved
with those airports closed because of COVID.
And when, when, when the borders opened, uh,
the airports continued operating.
So, so there was, there, well there wasn't a,
there wasn't an establishment
or set up cost required to get those airports up
and running to accommodate passengers once the border is
opened following COVID, how Dun Dunedin required put out
recoding new equipment to be purchased
to push into the airport to set it up and operated.
Is that, is that different to Dunedin? Yes,
Yes. Yes. In the
period of time from when the border has reopened
to the need an opening this year in 2025,
Help, help us to understand why.
Do you wanna talk? Yeah, sure.
Um, so we've got two different types of costs
that we are recovering at the moment.
One is the process and costs, which is once a airport is up
and running, um, all the costs go
through those border processing levies.
And that's a well established process now since 2015.
So the costs we are talking about
of the airport's Cost Recovery Act are establishment costs.
So they're separate from that.
Um, if there's no establishment costs, then we don't need
to go there in terms of using regulations under the
Airport's Cost Recovery Act, um,
the Airports Cost Recovery Act also has grace period
of six months within where if you have to stop operating,
then you can go back in again.
Um, certainly COVID was, well,
clearly like nothing we've ever seen before.
Um, it meant that in some respects, all bets were off
and we were trying our very best to make sure
that we were doing the best for our border services.
Um, and as Stu
and Diana have said, we didn't need to go there
because there weren't any establishment costs,
Dunedin was different.
Um, the time period between them stopping
and now restarting in this June, um, drove costs
and drove establishment costs.
Diana's teams worked really hard with Dunedin Airport
to make sure we've minimized those.
And, um, Steiner said, we've brought them down from,
what was it, two 70 to about one 50, um,
noting customs costs will be invoiced
separately to that. Okay.
Thank you. I've got a question here. So
I have a process question.
So do you have an agreement between NPI
and Dunedin Airport where you actually sit down,
have a meeting and agree which equipments
you would actually renew?
So that Dunedin Airport actually has a say
because it is a cost recovery, um, model,
and it's not a decision that you just make on your own
or customs makes on their own as to which equipment
to get rid of and which one to just bind you. Yeah,
So Diane can talk to the
process, process around that can talk.
Um, I mean, ultimately we, you know, we do need
to make the actual decisions in terms of what we need
to run the facility and operate.
Um, but, um, but we'll obviously work with Dun Airport and,
and Hamilton, uh, in terms of getting there.
And that's part of the process that's been followed
to get this, this cost down from where we started, uh,
from 270, 280 odd thousand down to about 115. But, um,
I can talk to that.
A, a typical example would be the IT equipment,
for instance, laptops, et cetera.
They get defunct very, very easily.
They run, they come to end of life, so we have
to have laptops to operate.
But we, we sat down with Dunedin
for several months explaining where our costs were,
what equipment we'd need to bring in.
There's some equipment that we've minimized
that we might have in other airports
that we don't quite have in Dunedin.
We've gone for a cheaper, um, version.
So we've tried to do everything we possibly can
to minimize the amount of equipment
that had to be purchased.
Another example will be signage and postage, et cetera.
So layouts, et cetera, had changed.
We've used all the signage that was there as much
as we possibly can, but we had
to add some minimal signage to assist.
So we did sit down with Edin for several months,
but we do reserve the right to be able to say,
we require this in order to operate.
So there was no equipment discarded as such.
It was just equipment needed to be brought in.
That's helpful. Thank you.
Um, I'm gonna have three more questions.
We've got four more minutes. Dr. Nan first. Oh, okay.
Miles Anderson, then Grant McCullum, then Dr.
Nan, then we'll come to council. Just wanna
Talk about a couple of invoices that, um,
you need an airport as a chain should be, um, covered
by border processing duties and not the one off cost.
One was around, um, training and recruitment costs,
and the other was for, uh, x-ray role of Gravity system.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Um, could you in enlighten us on those please? So,
Training costs for renewing established airport, we have
to recruit additional staff.
What we've done to minimize that cost to Dunedin Airport
as well, is we've actually taken staff from across the
country and put them in.
So there's actually very little training costs being
applied, if any, to need airport through the invoice.
But you don't agree that it should be paid for
by the board of process Levy as opposed to the
Not for establishment Establishment cost.
And what about the x-ray roll gravity system again, is
that, uh, you, you are,
you are saying it's establishment cost?
Yes. The x-ray
that was present in the red airport is nearly
end of life, really old.
We had it refurbished, put the roller system in,
and again, we did everything we could to make sure
that was a minimal cost roller system.
And the bench attached it, for instance,
is not our normal roller system.
It's a cheaper single bench.
Um, so we did minimize that as much as possible,
but we do need the equipment Grant
McCallum. Yeah,
I'm, I'm a pretty female minded person,
and COVID was a very unique experience for everybody.
And Queenstown and Wellington are much bigger airports.
Right. And, and
therefore you can see how they could get back going a lot
quicker to need in a much smaller airport,
and they're being punished.
It would appear to me by simply
because of the global situation they came across
as a small player in trying to get reestablished,
they're getting punished, whereas the old,
which whereas the bigger airports are just sort
of were able to carry on.
And it just strikes me as being completely unfair.
Would you have any comment on that?
Well, again, I think I'd, I'd come back to, you know,
the objectives of the act, uh,
in the airport Cost Recovery Act, which are
to reduce the crown's exposure to liabilities.
And so ministers
and cabinet have decided to put these regulations in place
with, with one of those objectives in mind.
Um, in that, uh, new airports starting up
or reestablishing, uh,
under the airport cost recovery Act need
to pay the cost of those establishment.
Yeah. So, so do you, did you go, did you approach cabinet
to see if you could get some capital expenditure for this?
No. Well, no. Well, ministers
obviously, uh, go through cabinet.
Um, but we were faced with the situation.
We sually, there were two new airports looking to,
to set up reestablish, um, and, uh,
and that, you know, that, that, that brought the matter
to light and, um, hence the process has been followed
to put these regulations into place.
Dr. Thank you.
Uh, one of the things we just heard, again, it's a process
and may a timeline question, apologies,
this has been responded to
before, um, which is the hospital said that, have,
they were in negotiation airport,
Did I say Have hospital? Hospital?
Oh, the hospital airport.
The need airport, um, said that they were in negotiations
with, um, Jetstar.
And again, it wasn't until
after that kind of contract contractual agreement has been
signed that they again found out exactly
how much they're gonna be charged.
Mm-hmm. From a process perspective, what's the process
of you working with the Nan Hospital to ensure that
that cost at least an estimated cost is upfront
before some of those contractual decisions?
Mm-hmm. Yeah, there's two aspects of that.
One is, um, knowing
what the actual quantum of the costs were.
And the other thing is knowing that this is a business cost
that you could reasonably and foreseeably expect.
So the Airport's Cost Recovery Act has been on the box
since 2014.
So it is well known that this is a liability
that a new restarting airport could be liable for.
It's the first point. Um, the second point is that, um,
there's been informal discussions
with Dunedin Airport for some time.
Um, and even before we started consulting on this, um,
Dunedin airport did know that it was possible
that they could be liable for these costs.
Then we went through a process of formal consultation
through our discussion document.
And, um, I'm not quite sure if the exact timeline, Daniel,
as to when the paperwork was signed,
but our view is this is a foreseeable business cost.
Fair enough. They didn't know the exact quantum
that, that that is true.
And that's partly because we needed
to get those regs in place to enable, to know
what was the parameters of the regulations,
which then drives the costs.
Thank you. Now, ministers have been really clear with us
that they expected us to work in good
faith, and we've done that.
Thank you. Um, and just one final question
and then we'll, um, thank you very much for your time.
The, um, just what you've said there,
that is I think a key point.
Mm-hmm. When was the last time that the Airports Recovery,
uh, airport Cost Recovery Act was used
to charge a lumps lump sum?
So this, this is the first time,
'cause we needed the regulations in place in order
to fully implement the act.
And when were the regulations in place?
Um, since, uh, 10 March, 2025.
Okay. Thank you very much.
This is an important part of, um,
accountability of executive government.
For the people who follow along on this closely,
there won't be many, but thank you very much for coming,
outing our questions.